the smart bombs and watching them too? Yeah, I was
watching Channel 9, and they showed about these
laser-guided or radio-guided bombs, how they get
them to blow up their target. And, you know, I
pieced two and two together. That's what we did. We
helped conduct their experiments and perfect
their laser bombs and stuff. What do you think of
that? I mean, all those men that got lost when
trying to retrieve that bomb, did you think that
was the time and place to be doing something like
that? No, no. But, you know, I figured somebody had
to do it. You know, if it wasn't done there, it might
have been done under worse conditions. Maybe
something, maybe the enemy might have got it and
ruined whatever plans we had. for that weapon.
But it was just a part of us being mobile,
amphibious, that we could go anywhere.
I think it was harder on us because we not only had to
maintain this vehicle weight, 34 tons, that we had
to keep going over here. an infantryman out in the
jungle. All he's got is his rifle and his pack on his
back. Yet we had an extra burden to haul all over
Vietnam. Did you ever have any close buddies that
were wounded? And were you ever wounded? Yeah, I
had a few, quite a few that were wounded. I was never
hurt. I was lucky. Just bullets would bounce
around me from sniper fire. But I guess I was really
fortunate in that we had one guy that got shot in the
throat. And the way the doctors told us, he could
have lived if he hadn't given up. But he just gave up
and died.
And there was a lot of guys that every once in a while
we'd have to haul back some dead bodies inside in
the body banks. And that was pretty gross. But the
way I felt that if I ever got shot or if I was going to
get killed, I didn't want to see it coming. Just get
caught completely by surprise.
Not even see the man that shot me. So when y'all ever
killed any B.C. male like that one time in the
village, what did you do with those bodies? I mean,
were there any, like, kind of, I've heard stories
where, like, taken off the ears or... I never saw it
done. I never saw it done. I heard about stuff, but I
never saw anybody with ears or body parts or
anything, or teeth or anything. I'm not saying it
never happened, because it's been my experience
with people that people are capable of anything.
But I never saw it done.
And I wouldn't do it. I wouldn't be a part of it. The
worst kind of tortures I ever saw were done because
we carried the Korean soldiers, too. Now, they
were real cold-blooded torturers. They would,
when they were interrogating Viet Cong
prisoners, they would torture them with stick
thorns in their ears and then slap them into their
ears. And we were nearby because we had to
transport them. We could hear their screams and
everything. And they'd hang people. When they
were through torturing them, shoot them in the
back of the head if they were too... cut up or
emulated. But it was mainly done by the Koreans. So
y'all just had a policy of what turning the other
way until they were done with their business.
Right.
Any of the buddies that you ever had, did you ever
feel like maybe they were losing it? Did you ever
feel like, my god, I want to get out of here? And you
just didn't think you could handle another day?
Did you ever see any instances of your fellow peers
breaking down? Yeah, I saw some would break down to
the point where they would like cowardice in the
face of the enemy, or they didn't want to go on a
patrol, or they turned to drugs.
I'd say one third of possible You know, 100 would go
bad and break down.
So are you saying that where did they get drugs and
when did they use them? I mean, when they were out on
patrol or what? Drugs you could get just driving
down the road. The sellers would be standing
alongside the road with big packs of marijuana
cigarettes like that in their hand. And we'd be in a
convoy, and whenever the convoy would slow down,
Some guys would buy it. This one guy knew he was
buying it and shipping it home.
He was from Chicago. He was supplying his buddies
in Chicago, and they would send him the money to buy
it. And then whenever we went out on patrol or a
mission, we would make sure there weren't any
dopers in our outfit. How do you do that? search
them or, you know, you can tell by living with the
guys. Because marijuana, you can smell it. It
smells weird. I don't know if you've ever smelled
it. No, I smell it too. And then you could tell the
guys are spaced out because they act kind of out of
it, you know. So before we went out on patrol, we
knew who was with it and who was on drugs, and we
wouldn't let them go with us. Or else we'd search
them for their stuff and make them leave it behind.
If there was a pot smoker or two, we'd go ahead and
take them, but without their marijuana. Did you
ever smoke marijuana? I mean, did you ever think? I
did try it once, but it made me sick. It scared me. It
kind of like paralyzed me. It scared me so bad I
never did it again, just that one time. And it was in
a tent. We had our corpsman. He was a pot smoker.
He had what was called a pot party. I didn't want any
part of it. I guess it was just my attitude, my...
deep down personal resentment for it. It caused me
to have a bad reaction to it. And I felt like I was
paralyzed sitting there. And I thought to myself,
oh shit, what am I going to do if a Viet Cong attack
now? Or if they're coming? I felt so immobilized
that
an enemy could be holding a gun on me and I couldn't
move. I was just paralyzed. So I never tried it
again. Never did. didn't want anything to do with
it. So is that what y'all did on your free time? I
mean, did y'all mainly work at night and then in the
day, what did you do? Yeah, well, we maintained our
vehicles and then we had to keep our own living
areas clean. And then we were sent on details to
clean different areas at camp. Our human waste, we
had to burn it every day. And then we had to dig
bunkers. Whenever we got shelled, we had to hide
underground in these bunkers. And then the
command tractors needed extra maintenance
because
they had four sets of radios, one for aircraft, one
for naval gunfire and artillery fire, and then
basic headquarters communications. So They
moved us. Every once in a while, we had to do a
certain amount of time with the headquarters
platoon to stay in touch with evacuation
procedures, the mobile command headquarters,
the operation of the vehicle, and how to stay in
tune with command decisions and stuff. And then
we'd rotate to the other platoons another
platoon, the platoon with the best vehicles would
be sent the farthest out on the jungle patrols and
there was this one operation it was called
Operation Snaggle Tooth and it was an ongoing
operation the one platoon with the best tractors
would always go on that operation and we got to go on
it once because They reassigned us and reformed us
into the Marines were going to make one final push
on this Operation Snaggletooth. And off the
coast, there was this island that was all Viet Cong
held. And they'd sent the Marines out there to try
and wipe them out. But they were real fierce. It was
a hardcore North Vietnamese army. And there was a
lot of Marines lost before they finally did take
that island. And at night when we were on beach
guard, bodies would come floating across the
ocean and wash up on the shore. Some would be North
Vietnamese. And every once in a while, there'd be a
Marine in there. You all would collect them? Yeah.
Turn them over to wherever. If it was a Marine,
well, we'd turn it over to our graves
registration. And if it was an enemy, we'd turn it
over to the...
Our intelligence unit would search the bodies. G2
was intelligence. They'd come and claim the
bodies and search them, try to figure out if he was a
real North Vietnamese or a Viet Cong insurgent
from the area. Were
your officers ever obsessed with body counts?
Like, that was important? And did you feel that was
a good rate or way to measure things? Our officers
weren't. It was mainly the infantry outfits that
we supported. Whenever we'd take them supplies,
this one company was always going out in the jungle
and getting into heavy combat. They called him
Suicide Charlie. because their officers had
suicidal tendencies. The missions they would
send them on, they were always outnumbered and
outgunned. And then there was another company
called Dying Delta Company, D Company, because
they would get shot up and overrun. Because of the
area, the jungle they were in, the enemy had real
eyes. strength and they would attack them and kill
quite a few. So those were about the worst infantry
companies we had ever gotten mixed up with. Dying
Delta and Suicide Charlie. How were the
conditions like? Do you think you were fed well or
maybe compared to other officers? Yeah, we got to
eat a lot better than Because we would carry the
food to the infantry, and every once in a while
they'd try to give the infantry a good hot meal. So
they'd send us to this big mess hall in Da Nang, and
we'd load up with these insulated canisters of hot
food and take it out to the infantry. Well, and
along the way we'd help ourselves. And... So we
were fortunate in that area. We got to handle all
the supplies, and when you handle all the
supplies, you get to pick the best. So we were
fortunate. But then, too, again, we had to
maintain this vehicle. Every once in a while, when
we replaced some of the parts that weighed 100
pounds, like the torsion arms and wheels and the
track, so we'd have to use sledgehammers to take
the track apart, knock the pins out, And in the
sand, these pins and track would wear out. So we'd
lay the track out and replace all the pins that
there was too much play in the track. Put all new
pins in, button it back up, and check our torsion
arms and everything, all our suspension system
and overhaul in. So I was pretty muscular and
everything from swinging a sledgehammer and
maintaining these vehicles.
You said that you went near the DMZ line? DMZ or DMC?
DMZ, Demilitarized Zone. So what does that mean?
Is there lots of fighting there? Well, basically
what it was supposed to be is a border between North
and South Vietnam, and no military positions or
equipment were allowed in this area. But every
once in a while, nor Vietnamese would sneak people
across through there. It was never honored. And
mainly what we did was, you know, again, river
patrols of the rivers that were in that area.
Because a river over there is like a highway here to
us. They use it to transport stuff rather than pack
their way through the jungle. We were like a
highway patrol over
there. And any ship that tried to run away from us,
we had orders to sink it. And then we sunk quite a few
boats.
After a while, why were you there in the beginning,
and why did you think you were there later on? Did
you really think that that was why you were there?
I'm trying to say, and also, did you have any, like,
you were really anti-communist, and did you think
China was helping the Vietnamese in North Vietnam
at all? Yeah, I grew up with an extreme sense of
patriotism because of, you know, my fathers had
defended this country, and my grandfather in
World War I, my father and uncles in World War II.
When Kennedy... came out that he was against
communism and they tried to attack Cuba and that he
supported the operation against Cuba in the Bay of
Pigs. And then Lee Harvey Oswald was his
communists affiliation. He was, you know, spent
some time in Russia and he assassinated Kennedy.
Well, I had a deep sense against communism and the
way, you know, Kennedy had tried to stop it. So I, at
first, when I first got to Vietnam, I thought we
were doing the right thing and trying to stop
communism. But as the war dragged on and I did my 13
months of where I came home and I saw the politics
and everything, I was sorry, you know, I had ever
participated. Because I knew we weren't going to
win, and yet we had already lost thousands of lives
and young men's lives. So I started to just want an
end to it. When did you know you weren't going to
win? I mean, when you went there, obviously you
thought we were going to win, right? Yeah, right,
back in the 60s. In the 60s, it looked good, like we
were going... And then when I came home, Johnson
was committing more and more troops. And then when
I finally realized we weren't going to win was when
Nixon took over. And then at the end of Johnson's
term, you know, how he had aged. And after all the
troops he'd committed and everything, you could
tell the toll on him. And I said, no, we're not going
to follow through and win. I figured we were just
going to pull out. Did you think it was a war or a
military assignment? No, it was a war. It was
definitely a war.
I know it was called a policing action, but if you
ever saw a B-52 airstrike where sections of the
jungle jump in the air and trees go flying through
the air and You know it's a war. It is a war. What was
the worst sight you had ever seen there? I mean, in
Vietnam, what scares you the most about bad
memories?
I guess just the mutilated bodies and the damage
that bullets do. I was assigned temporary duty in a
prisoner of war camp. and where they kept these
North Vietnamese, the real hardcore troops,
locked up. And most of them, the only way they were
captured was if they were shot up. This one guy had a
little bullet hole here in his arm, and his whole
elbow was missing. Another guy had his leg shot
off. And when the doctor would go to look at him,
we'd have to wash him and scrub his nub. clean it up
for the doctor to look at. And then some of the
prisoners wouldn't eat. They'd go on hunger
strikes, and they would starve to death right
there in the cells. You could just see them. As it
is, they were thin people, but you could almost see
a perfect skeleton and skull when they died from
starving themselves to death. Would you say they
had a different view of death than maybe we do? I
mean, why did they do that? I guess it's their way of
protesting their conditions, that they're
intolerable to their spirit. Their will to live
diminishes being captive. And I thought to
myself, too, if I ever got captured, that I
wouldn't live very long. I wouldn't want to live
like that. Like I saw these pilots that were
captured by the North, the way they were treated
and beaten and dehumanized. I said to myself, I'll
either make them kill me or I'll escape. And as a
last resort, I'd do away with myself. But it would
really have to be the last resort.
and it was basically these living conditions and
then like mainly we were put in charge of guarding
the the vietnamese but in another stockade there
was marine prisoners and army prisoners and every
once in a while they would riot and throw try to set
this camp on fire But only the regular MPs,
military police, took care
of it. Shut it off. You're talking about the
prisoners? Yeah, and the other stockade, they had
military prisoners, American soldiers that had
done stuff, you know, crimes like, you know, rape
or something like that. stealing,
insubordination against officers. And one night
they had a riot, and they would set stuff on fire and
throw it over in the Vietnamese prisoner of war
camp, trying to set it on fire. And the MPs went in
there, and they shot the hardcore, the real
hardcore leaders. And the rest of them, they kept
them in solitary confinement. This is the
captured North Vietnam? No, these were American
soldiers that had committed crimes that were in
Vietnam. Oh, OK. So they were kept near the
prisoners of war? Yes. That way, we had machine gun
towers around, and we could cover both prisons if
they ever tried to escape or something. What did
you think of those that had committed these war
crimes, Americans? Did you think, hey, it's just
something that happens in a war like this? Yeah.
Were they guilty? Yeah, they lose their sense,
their mission, and their dedication and turn to
crime. I thought they deserved everything they
got, especially the hardcore ones that were in
solitary confinement. What were some of the worst
things that they did? Well, I guess rape, murder,
mutilation, stuff like that. That was about the
worst thing you can do in a war. And some would deal
in the black market and sell the enemy weapons and
stuff. It was a little bit of everything over
there.
Did you ever, OK, this is going to sound weird, R&R,
did you ever get that, you know, and what happened
and what did you do? I got in-country R&R at a place
that, it got real glamorous and fancy in the 70s and
the late 70s, but when they first opened it up, all
they had was a movie screen, and it's called China
Beach, that movie episode. But when it first
started up, it was just a place on the beach for, GIs
to rest for three days. It's nothing like a TV
episode. And they had a big mess hall, and they had
fresh eggs, ham and eggs, breakfast, stuff like
that. And that was it, just three days in country.
No alcohol, no women there, or nothing? Well, they
had beer. Beer was $0.10 a can. But there weren't
any women there. Really? Okay,
when you were in a village or whenever you
encountered an enemy, what were the identifying
marks for BC? I mean, how would you know if somebody
was? Well, it was like saying they wore black
pajamas, but that wasn't always true. But you
could tell by the look in somebody's eyes.
Especially the Orientals, some of them can say a
lot with their eyes. They
would try to avoid a direct stare by us. And then
we'd check their IDs, because when we went on
patrol in the village, that was our main goal, to
check that everyone was properly identified and
to search for weapons. But you could pretty much
well tell by someone's actions when they were an
enemy or not. And most of the time they would run
away when they heard we were coming and hide and
possibly set up an ambush for when we were coming
back out or take pot shots as snipers when we were
far enough away. When you ever found out, I mean,
that they were there, How were they treated? I
mean, were they like abused right then and there?
If the hardcore infantry got hold of them, yeah,
they would get beaten up right away,
interrogated, and then they'd get tied up. There
was this one black infantry guy that we were with,
his name was, his nickname was Buttplate, because
the M14 had him steal like flapper on the stock of
the gun. And whenever he captured an enemy, he
would beat the crap out of them with that steel
plate, bust their heads open and everything. And
they nicknamed him Butt Plate Smith, because he
was a big old black guy. And that's why they
nicknamed him. He would always butt plate
somebody on the head. So you think that was a lot of
racism or enemy feelings that made him do this, or
what? He had seen a lot of his friends killed by the
Viet Cong and he hated all Orientals. Understand?
He'd even have trouble with the Koreans that were
fighting alongside of him. Yeah, basically it was
like reverse prejudice that he was taking out. How
would you compare the Koreans to Arvin? The
Koreans were the fiercest fighters. They were
always ready to do hand-to-hand combat, always
practicing, even on each other. Early in the
morning before breakfast, they'd do martial
arts. And they were real fierce fighters. Like I
told you earlier, they would torture anybody,
men, women, old people. They didn't care. Torture
them and mutilate them. Did you ever experience
any racism there? Yeah, a couple of times. Like
what? Well, I was one of the few, there was only
about three of us Hispanics in the company I was in.
And some of the harder core white guys were, you
could tell they were prejudiced. They'd make
remarks, they called us greasers. But
most of them accepted us. What surprised me was
some of them from Tennessee, because they were
real hardcore, prejudiced people in those days,
were from North Carolina, Tennessee, Georgia,
Alabama, Mobile.
But once you got out in the... This was, you know,
the worst thing to be is in Garrison or in the
company area. Because the guys get on each other's
nerves. You go to the club and drink, and then your
basic prejudices come out. You start taking your
nerves out on each other. But most of the time, this
is another reason why I didn't need any R&Rs. We
were always on the move in our vehicles, amphibs,
constantly patrolling, always on the move. Then
some, this one infantry area we were in, the black
guys, were real prejudice against any kind of
Hispanics or white people. And they had their own
group. It was a bunch of black infantry guys. And
they had set up a boxing ring. And they would
challenge the white guys and anybody they could to
get in that ring room. Did you ever do that? No, I
came close to it. But... I'd just tell him, hey, go
out there and get Charlie and beat the shit out of
him for taking your prejudice out on us, you know?
Do you think that was really strange? I mean, when
you all are supposed to be fighting together and
then this racist guy... Yeah, yeah, but like I
said, people are capable of anything. You'd be
surprised what you find people doing.
When you found out... When you had to go home, how
did you feel? I mean, how were you? Well, I felt
happy and nervous and like they were probably
going to extend all of us to stay over there or some
way to shaft us, well, me. And you were constantly
on guard waiting to get shot or something. I was
lucky I never did get hurt over there. But you get
all kinds of mixed feelings. You're worried about
the long flight home, something's going to go
wrong with a plane. Just a thousand things go
through your head. Did it never happen in your mind
that, hey, I want to stay for another tour, come
back for another tour or anything like that? No,
not after what I'd seen. And... I just had my fill of
the war. And then the politics involved, too. And
then, you know, watching guys go crazy,
especially when we came home and we didn't know
what was happening to some of the guys, what they
were going through, post-traumatic shock
syndrome or whatever it's called. I saw a lot of
guys go bananas there at Camp Pendleton. This one
guy,
I happened to be the duty NCO that night, and he just
came to the front of the building and just started
breaking all the windows with his bare hands. And
he was all cut up and bleeding. That was when you
returned home? Yeah. I guess that something just
snapped in his head. He was all cut up and bleeding,
and I had to call the... I was in charge of the banks,
and I had to call the medical people out there to
come help him before he bled to death. And then
another guy borrowed this other guy's car, and
when he was driving off the base, he just ran right
through the gate real fast, and the MPs fired at him
and chased him into town, and ended up... He was
lucky they didn't kill him. They just wounded him
and arrested him. But a lot of guys that went
bananas. Is there anything, do you feel like you
changed in any way? Yeah, I just have a real serious
attitude.
It's hard for me to laugh and ease up. And mainly I'm
just devoted to my job. When you came home, I always
hear stories about, oh, they always gave ticket,
whatever, whatever, parades for the other world,
for the other wars, and for Vietnam, they didn't
care. Is that the impression you got from the other
people here in the United States? Yeah, well, I try
to figure things out for myself. And, you know,
like World War II had a definite end, and... all the
troops were coming home, to me, there never will be
a definite end to Vietnam. Because the way I see it,
sooner or later, we're going to have to go back
there. Why? Different things, like the
Orientals, to me, like remember what happened
with Japan now? You know, when we dropped the bomb
on them, we thought we had destroyed them.
completely annihilated them. Now they've
started like an economic war. They're out selling
us and they're better off than we are now.
Eventually I think this will lead to an overall
clash between the United States and Japan.
To me, as long as there's different races, there's
going to be conflicts like what's going on in South
America. It's a jungle terrain like Vietnam was.
So we have to send troops in there. I've heard some
remarks that those guerrillas in South America
say this will be a worse war than Vietnam. So
there'll always be another Vietnam, or it'll
never end. Did anybody ever make you feel ashamed
that you had been in Vietnam? No. No, I never got the
kind of... Some guys said they got spat on and
remarks called baby killers and all that, but I
never did. And even if they did say that to my face,
it wouldn't hurt me because I know what kind of
service I did over there. And like I said, I think I
did 50% to help the people and the other 50% to hurt
the enemy. So I have a great sense of
accomplishment in my service in Vietnam. What did
you think about anti-war protests, burning up the
draft cards? Well, I believe in freedom of speech,
and that's another thing I went into the military
to defend. People have a right to express their
opinions Whatever way, shape, or form, it doesn't
hurt someone else. So, it doesn't bother me. Why do
you think we lost FINA? Because the politicians
were afraid that if we invaded the North, it would
escalate into war with China and Russia. I think
our politicians were basically afraid they would
start World War III. and it would be against the
yellow man. That's the main thing I think our
president, our politicians were afraid
of. Now they have all these Vietnam memorials and
whatnot. What do you think of those things? I think
it's good, but most of it, doesn't really to me come
from the people because like the Vietnam memorial
here in San Antonio it's paid being paid for by the
veterans themselves so to me these memorials have
a hollow empty thing about them and then the the
main Vietnam memorial um Again, you know, I think
it's great for the guys that died and, you know,
their names are on it, but my name isn't on it. And
it'll, you know, it'll never be on there. But I
think it's great, like I said, for the dead to
remember them. Each individual with his name on
that wall. But it doesn't... really affect
me. Vietnam, is that something you really want
people to know about? Because I know in grade
school and high school, I never learned anything
about it. I'm just really learning about it now. I
think the only way I deal with the stress I feel from
having been over there is to educate myself about
it, exactly what happened. And every once in a
while, I'll I'll rent a videotape about the 10,000
Day War. That's a series of videotapes that tells
you exactly why, what happened, what decisions
our president made, and how Ho Chi Minh met with his
leaders and turned around and overturned the
plans of the United States so that he could free his
people would unite, you know, because it was
basically a civil war like our civil war, the north
against the south. The south didn't want to go
along with the north, so the north started sending
troops to kill or overthrow the regime and bring
the people back under its control. So I felt like we
were meddling in affairs that weren't any of our
business. But like I said, I had a tremendous sense
to try and stop communism. I grew up worshiping
President Kennedy. And when someone affiliated
with a communist party killed him, I kind of had a
bitter pill against communism.
How about Nixon in Cambodia? Well, I think he did
what his military advisors told him. You know,
hey, we're taking a beating. These guys are
running a couple of miles into Cambodia and
laughing at us. It's back to the old cat and mouse
routine.
Nixon turned loose the troops to go and do away with
that harassment they were getting. So that was
justified? I think it was, yeah. I'm going to wind
down. Just how have your feelings changed over
time about the war? Well, like I was saying
earlier,
I've studied it and the decisions that were made
and it was the politicians that blew it. And I don't
feel bad about it. It doesn't bother me. That's how
I've overcome my stress and stuff. I know exactly
what happened. I've educated myself to know what
happened and who made what decisions and what
brought them to that point. What do you think about
these movies like Platoon and, you know,
Apocalypse Now? Do you think that they really give
an accurate portrayal or they're glossing it
over? I don't think Apocalypse Now, I think that
more is a comedy, you know, like a satire. To me,
that's what... Platoon, I think it was real
accurate as to what happened to the army over
there. It was a pretty good movie to show the young
man what war was like in that era, in that time. But
man is always improving and changing his weapons
and his tactics, so I think the next war will be even
more deadly. because we're getting to the point
where most of our weapons are push-button and
there's nothing personal involved, you know.
It's real, more like computer games.
I think that these movies show what war was like
then, but for everyone, future generations, it's
going to be different. I'm done asking questions.
If you have any comments that you want to make sure
that maybe I understand, that's fine. If not,
that's okay. No, I just, you know, I had, you asked
me earlier if I did want to go back to Vietnam. You
know, when I, like I said, I was over there in the
early 60s and it was kind of crude at first. I think
in the If I had gone back again in the 70s, because I
came back in 67, all
you had to do was spend 90 days here in the United
States, and then the Marines usually would send
you back for a second tour. And I just decided that
I'd had enough, and I wasn't going to stay in the
Marines because 90 days later I'd end up back in
Vietnam. Because I had a critical MOS, armored
personnel carriers were critical MOS. And I knew
I'd end up right back again if I reenlisted, so I got
out.
That's about all I have to say. Okay, thanks.